added nextauth migration guide (#665)
clerk/clerk-docs: docs/guides/nextauth-migration.mdx

---

> title: Migrating from NextAuth.js

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Migrating to Clerk from NextAuth.js
```

## Install `@clerk/nextjs`

Clerk's Next.js SDK gives you access to prebuilt [components](https://clerk.com/docs/components/overview), [hooks](https://clerk.com/docs/references/nextjs/overview#client-side-helpers), and [helpers](https://clerk.com/docs/references/nextjs/overview) for Next.js Server Components, Route Handlers and Middleware. Install it by running the following command in your terminal:

```tsx
npm install @clerk/nextjs
```

## Set environment keys

Create an account on [clerk.com](http://clerk.com) and create a new application.

Store the keys in the `.env.local` file of your Next.js application.

```tsx
NEXT_PUBLIC_CLERK_PUBLISHABLE_KEY=pk_test_••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
CLERK_SECRET_KEY=sk_test_••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
```

## Signing in

**Account Portal**

Account Portal is the fastest way to authenticate your app. It does not require you to build any authentication UI in your app, similar to the [default unbranded pages](https://next-auth.js.org/getting-started/rest-api#get-apiauthsignin) provided by NextAuth. [Read more about Account Portal](https://clerk.com/docs/account-portal/getting-started).

> To use the Account Portal, simply replace the links to the sign-in/sign-up pages with `<SignInButton>` or `<SignUpButton>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the Account Portal, simply replace the links to the sign-in/sign-up pages with `[<SignInButton>](/docs/components/unstyled/sign-in-button)` or `[<SignUpButton>](/docs/components/unstyled/sign-out-button)`.
```

Reviewer: You applied the links, but I think the format I wrote them in is wrong and they are not links.

> To use the Account Portal, simply replace the links to the sign-in/sign-up pages with `<SignInButton>` or `<SignUpButton>`.

Reviewer: You applied the links, but I think the format I wrote them in is wrong and they are not links.

**Self-hosted UI**

If you want sign-in and sign-up pages in your own application, you can use Clerk's pre-built components, or implement the UI yourself using Clerk's hooks.

Add the following environment variables to define your sign-in, sign-up, and redirect URLs with Clerk.

```tsx
NEXT_PUBLIC_CLERK_SIGN_UP_URL=
NEXT_PUBLIC_CLERK_SIGN_IN_URL=
NEXT_PUBLIC_CLERK_AFTER_SIGN_UP_URL=
NEXT_PUBLIC_CLERK_AFTER_SIGN_IN_URL=
```

You can simply replace the existing UI with Clerk's fully pre-built `<SignIn>` and `<SignUp>` components.

```tsx
// App Router   - /app/sign-in/[[...sign-in]]/page.tsx
// Pages Router - /pages/sign-in/[[...index]].tsx

import { SignIn } from "@clerk/nextjs"
 
export default function Page() {
  return <SignIn />;
}
```

For fully custom UI, replace the existing functionality with [appropriate custom flows](https://clerk.com/docs/custom-flows/overview#custom-flows). With Custom flows, you leverage Clerk's React hooks `useSignIn` and `useSignUp` to build fully custom UI that handles authentication with email and password, OAuth, magic links, OTP etc.

(maybe a small example?)

## Protecting your app

> **Provider**

Reviewer: The Clerk Provider section should be its own section after the ENV VARs section, not in the 'protecting' section.

> **Provider**

Reviewer: The Provider section still needs to move up.

Replace `<SessionProvider session={session}>` with `<ClerkProvider {...pageProps}>` (or just `<ClerkProvider>` for App Router)

```tsx
// With NextAuth.js

import { SessionProvider } from "next-auth/react"

export default function App({
  Component,
  pageProps: { session, ...pageProps },
}) {
  return (
    <SessionProvider session={session}>
      <Component {...pageProps} />
    </SessionProvider>
  )
}
```

```tsx
// With Clerk

import { ClerkProvider } from "@clerk/nextjs";

export default function App({ Component, pageProps }) {
  return (
    <ClerkProvider {...pageProps}>
      <Component {...pageProps} />
    </ClerkProvider>
  );
}
```

**Middleware**

> Replace NextAuth middleware with clerkMiddleware, use `protectedRoutes` as needed.

Reviewer: Also link to /docs/references/nextjs/auth-middleware

```tsx
// With NextAuth.js

export { default } from "next-auth/middleware"

export const config = { matcher: [/** private routes */] }
```

```tsx
// With Clerk
import { clerkMiddleware, createRouteMatcher } from "@clerk/nextjs/server";
import { NextResponse } from "next/server";

// opt into protection by adding routes to this array.
const isProtectedRoute = createRouteMatcher([/** private routes */]);

export default clerkMiddleware((auth, req) => {
  // Check if the user visiting a protected route is logged in
  // If not, redirect the user to the sign-in route
  if (!auth().userId && isProtectedRoute(req)) {
    return auth().redirectToSignIn();
  }

  // User isn't logged in and the route is public -- let them visit it
  return NextResponse.next();
});

export const config = {
  matcher: ["/((?!.+\\.[\\w]+$|_next).*)", "/", "/(api|trpc)(.*)"],
};
```

> NextAuth's middleware always rejects unauthorized requests, and you might be using the Next.js middleware config to protect specific private routes. Clerk's middleware can run for your entire application and gives you fine-grained control over handling the authenticated state. In this snippet, `createRouteMatcher` is used to define routes that should be protected, and the callback function checks for protected routes and redirects the user to a sign in page.

Reviewer: Change for authMiddleware.

> **Rendering**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Use Clerk's control components to control access
```

> To conditionally render UI when the user is signed in, wrap it with `<SignedIn>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To conditionally render UI when the user is signed in, wrap it with `[<SignedIn>](/docs/components/control/signed-in)`
```

Reviewer: You applied the links, but I think the format I wrote them in is wrong and they are not links.

> To conditionally render UI when the user is NOT signed in, wrap it with `<SignedOut>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To conditionally render UI when the user is NOT signed in, wrap it with `[<SignedOut>](/docs/components/control/signed-out)`
```

Reviewer: You applied the links, but I think the format I wrote them in is wrong and they are not links.

```tsx
// With Clerk

<SignedIn>
  <div>You are signed in</div>
</SignedIn>
<SignedOut>
  <div>You are signed out</div>
</SignedOut>
```

## Reading user and session data

Replace any `getServerSession(req, res, authOptions)` to `getAuth(req)` from Clerk.

```tsx
// With NextAuth.js

export async function getServerSideProps(context) {
  const session = await getServerSession(context.req, context.res, authOptions)
	...
```

```tsx
// With Clerk

export async function getServerSideProps(context) {
  const session = getAuth(context.req);
	...
	return { props: { ...buildClerkProps(ctx.req) } };
};
```

Replace NextAuth's `useSession` with Clerk's `useAuth` (or `useUser` if you need the full user object)

```tsx
// With NextAuth.js

import { useSession } from "next-auth/react"
...
const { data: session } = useSession()
```

```tsx
// With Clerk

import { useAuth, useUser } from "@clerk/nextjs";
...
const { userId, sessionId, getToken } = useAuth();
const { isSignedIn, user } = useUser();
```

> **User IDs as Foreign Keys**       

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### User IDs as Foreign Keys    
```

Reviewer: There should be a paragraph here that talks about Clerk's userId, and that there are different ways to resolve this when migration.

Reviewer: The requested paragraph is missing.

> When you migrate user data from NextAuth's database to Clerk, Clerk generates new user IDs for each user. If you are using existing user IDs as foreign keys in your database (e.g. in a `user_id` column), you can save those IDs as the user's `externalId` in Clerk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Use Clerk's `externalId` field

When you migrate user data from NextAuth's database to Clerk, Clerk generates new user IDs for each user. If you are using existing user IDs as foreign keys in your database (e.g. in a `user_id` column), you can save those IDs as the user's `externalId` in Clerk.
```

This `externalId` can be included in the session token by [adding this customization](https://clerk.com/docs/backend-requests/making/custom-session-token) -
`"userId": "{{user.external_id || user.id}}"`

In your application, you can access this id like this:

```tsx
const { sessionClaims: { userId } } = getAuth(req)
const { userId, sessionId, getToken } = useAuth();
```

, you'll get the `externalId` for the migrated users, and the Clerk-generated ID for users who sign up after the migration.

> Alternatively, after the data migration, you can update all the user IDs stored in your database as a foreign key to the new Clerk user IDs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Update your database

Alternatively, after the data migration, you can update all the user IDs stored in your database as a foreign key to the new Clerk user IDs.
```

You can read more about user IDs and user data migration [here](https://github.com/clerk/migration-script).

> ## Production Config

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Migrate users to a production instance
```

> Every Clerk application has a Development and a Production environment. Before you start migrating user data, you can enable Clerk's production environment and migrate your users directly onto the production instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every Clerk application has a Development and a Production instance. Before you start migrating user data, you will configure production instance and migrate your users directly into that instance.
```

> *You can migrate a small set of users on the development instance for testing/staging.*

Reviewer: Use the Callout component for this.

> 1. In the Clerk Dashboard, **create a production instance** for your application.
> 2. Configure DNS settings as instructed
> 3. Enable all the OAuth providers you have credentials for
> 4. Copy the OAuth credentials from your environment to the Clerk Dashboard.
> 5. Update the callback URLs in your OAuth applications on each respective service to the new URLs shown on the Clerk Dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Deploying to Production](/docs/deployments/overview#deploying-to-production) page covers creating a production instance.
```

## Migrating User Data

This walkthrough will help you move user data from your existing database to Clerk.

> T*o retain the user data in your database for easy querying, check out the documentation on [data synchronization with webhooks](https://clerk.com/docs/users/sync-data).*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*To retain the user data in your database for easy querying, check out the documentation on [data synchronization with webhooks](https://clerk.com/docs/users/sync-data).*
```

This should probably be a Callout. It definitely does not belong in this section -- this is not related to migration user data. Perhaps its own section below.

Reviewer: Reading this again, either the whole line should not be italics or if its that important it should be a Callout. There is another line just above that this applies to as well.

> 1. Separately, clone `github.com/clerk/migration-script`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Clone `github.com/clerk/migration-script`
```

> 2. Create a `.env` file in the root with the `CLERK_SECRET_KEY` **of your production instance**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Create a `.env` file in the root of the cloned repository with the `CLERK_SECRET_KEY` **of your production instance**.
```

> 3. Export all the user data from your database into a users.json file

Reviewer: Is there a link to NextAuth.js docs that will help here?

>     1. The file should be in the format described in the migration script readme and sample.

Reviewer: The format should be shared here in a code block.

>     2. If you already have an API endpoint that returns a list of users you could use that.

Reviewer: How? This is confusing. An endpoint can't be used with a SQL query like below. This also almost implies the script can use the endpoint. This needs refactoring.

    
    SQL example
    
    ```tsx

>     SELECT id as userId, email, name FROM users

Reviewer: Does this result in the correct format for users.json? If so, please explicitly note that it does. Also, what about other fields?

    ```
    

> 4. Follow the instructions in the migration script to move all the users into Clerk.

Reviewer: This is a vague and confusing. 

In general this whole section needs to decide if it is going to instruct the user on the script or not. If so, then the instructions need to be clear from start to finish. If not, then it needs to refer to the README.

> 5. Verify by signing in to your application secured by Clerk.

Reviewer: Also refer to the Dashboard -> Users. Use the link that opens the recent project when you add this.

---
title: Migrating to Clerk from NextAuth.js
description: Migrating from NextAuth.js
---

<TutorialHero
  framework="next"
  beforeYouStart={[
    {
      title: "Set up a Clerk application",
      link: "https://clerk.com/docs/quickstarts/setup-clerk",
    }
  ]}
>

- Install `@clerk/nextjs`
- Set environment keys
- Wrap your Next.js app in `<ClerkProvider />`
- Setup Sign-up and Sign-in UI
- Protect your app
- Read user and session data
- User IDs as Foreign Keys
- Create a production instance
- Migrate users to a production instance
- Further support

</TutorialHero>

This guide shows how to migrate an application using NextAuth.js to use Clerk for authentication.

<Steps>

### Install `@clerk/nextjs`

> Clerk's Next.js SDK gives you access to prebuilt [components](https://clerk.com/docs/components/overview), [hooks](https://clerk.com/docs/references/nextjs/overview#client-side-helpers), and [helpers](https://clerk.com/docs/references/nextjs/overview) for Next.js Server Components, Route Handlers and Middleware. Install it by running the following command in your terminal:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clerk's Next.js SDK gives you access to prebuilt [components](/docs/components/overview), [hooks](/docs/references/nextjs/overview#client-side-helpers), and [helpers](/docs/references/nextjs/overview) for Next.js Server Components, Route Handlers and Middleware. Install it by running the following command in your terminal:
```

Use relative links

Reviewer 3: > Use relative links
Does it not work otherwise? What is the reasoning?

Reviewer: A full URL creates a 'leaving the site' type link.

Reviewer 3: Makes sense, thanks for the context.

<CodeBlockTabs type="installer" options={["npm", "yarn", "pnpm"]}>
  ```bash filename="terminal"
  npm install @clerk/nextjs
  ```

```bash filename="terminal"
yarn add @clerk/nextjs
```

```bash filename="terminal"
pnpm add @clerk/nextjs
```

</CodeBlockTabs>

### Set environment keys

Store the keys in the `.env.local` file of your Next.js application.

<InjectKeys>

```sh filename=".env.local"
NEXT_PUBLIC_CLERK_PUBLISHABLE_KEY={{pub_key}}
CLERK_SECRET_KEY={{secret}}
```

</InjectKeys>

> ### Wrap your Next.js app in `<ClerkProvider />`

Reviewer 2: Add a short introductory text what this section will be about

#### Remove your NextAuth.js `<SessionProvider />`

Replace `<SessionProvider session={session}>` with `<ClerkProvider>` if you are using App Router or `<ClerkProvider {...pageProps}>` if you are using Pages Router.

```tsx filename="_app.tsx"
// With NextAuth.js

import { SessionProvider } from "next-auth/react"

export default function App({
  Component,
  pageProps: { session, ...pageProps },
}) {
  return (
    <SessionProvider session={session}>
      <Component {...pageProps} />
    </SessionProvider>
  )
}
```

> #### Add `<ClerkProvider />` to your root `layout.tsx` file

Reviewer 2: I'd replace the `<h4>` with a numbered list instead since these are steps someone has to follow.

<CodeBlockTabs type="installer" options={["App Router", "Pages Router"]}>

```tsx filename="app/layout.tsx"
import { ClerkProvider } from '@clerk/nextjs'
import './globals.css'
 
export default function RootLayout({
  children,
}: {
  children: React.ReactNode
}) {
  return (
    <ClerkProvider>
      <html lang="en">
        <body>{children}</body>
      </html>
    </ClerkProvider>
  )
}
```

```tsx filename="_app.tsx"
import '@/styles/globals.css'
import { ClerkProvider } from "@clerk/nextjs";
import type { AppProps } from "next/app";
function MyApp({ Component, pageProps }: AppProps) {
  return (
    <ClerkProvider {...pageProps}>
      <Component {...pageProps} />
    </ClerkProvider>
  );
}
export default MyApp;
```
</CodeBlockTabs>

> ### Setup Sign-up and sign-in UI

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Setup sign-up and sign-in UI
```

#### Account Portal

> Account Portal is the fastest way to authenticate your app. Clerk's Account Portal hosts the `<SignIn />`, `<SignUp />`, `<UserProfile />` and other components for your application. Read more about [Account Portal](docs/account-portal/getting-started). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Account Portal is the fastest way to authenticate your app. Clerk's Account Portal hosts the `<SignIn />`, `<SignUp />`, `<UserProfile />`, and other components for your application. Read more about [Account Portal](/docs/account-portal/getting-started). 
```

Reviewer 3: lmao oxford comma. 

Is that `/` needed? did the link work before?

Reviewer: Yes, the lack of `/` creates http://localhost:4003/docs/docs/account-portal/getting-started -- note the `docs/docs/` in the middle.

To use the Account Portal, remove the routes that mount the NextAuth.js sign-in and sign-up UI. Replace the links to those routes with the [`<SignInButton>`](/docs/components/unstyled/sign-in-button) or [`<SignUpButton>`](/docs/components/unstyled/sign-out-button) components.

#### Self-hosted UI

If you want sign-in and sign-up pages in your own application, you can use [Clerk's pre-built components](/docs/references/nextjs/custom-signup-signin-pages), or implement the UI yourself using [Clerk's hooks](/docs/custom-flows/overview).

#### Custom UI

> For fully custom UI, replace the existing functionality with [appropriate custom flows](/docs/custom-flows/overview#custom-flows). With Custom flows, you leverage Clerk's React hooks `useSignIn` and `useSignUp` to build fully custom UI that handles authentication with email and password, OAuth, magic links, OTP or any other authenication option Clerk offers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For fully custom UI, replace the existing functionality with [appropriate custom flows](/docs/custom-flows/overview#custom-flows). With Custom flows, you leverage Clerk's React hooks `useSignIn` and `useSignUp` to build fully custom UI that handles authentication with email and password, OAuth, magic links, OTP or any other authentication option Clerk offers.
```

### Protect your app

#### Middleware

You will need to remove the NextAuth.js Middleware from your application, and replace it with the Clerk Middleware helper. NextAuth's middleware always rejects unauthorized requests. You may have additionally configured the Next.js middleware config to protect specific private routes. You will need to make note of this configuration so you can recreate it.

> ##### Remove the NextAuth.js Middleware

Reviewer 2: I'd also suggest using an ordered list here instead of headings

```tsx filename="middleware.ts"
export { default } from "next-auth/middleware"

export const config = { matcher: [/** private routes */] }
```
##### Add Clerk's `authMiddleware()`

> The example below is the starting Middleware configuration. Please read the [`authMiddleware()`](docs/references/nextjs/auth-middleware) documentation to learn how to configuration your Middleware. Clerk's Middleware will, by default, run for your entire application and gives you fine-grained control over handling the authenticated state. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The example below is the starting Middleware configuration. Please read the [`authMiddleware()`](/docs/references/nextjs/auth-middleware) documentation to learn how to configuration your Middleware. Clerk's Middleware will, by default, run for your entire application and gives you fine-grained control over handling the authenticated state. 
```

Reviewer 3: again, did the link work or was that breaking it?

> ```tsx filename="middlewanre.ts"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```tsx filename="middleware.ts"
```

 
export default async function Page() {
 
  const { userId } = auth();
  console.log(userId)

  return (
    <p>Home Page</p>
  )

}
```

```tsx filename="app/page.tsx"

export async function getServerSideProps(context) {
  const session = getAuth(context.req);
	
	return { props: { ...buildClerkProps(ctx.req) } };
};
```
</CodeBlockTabs>

#### Client Side

Replace NextAuth's `useSession` with Clerk's hooks.

```tsx filename="app/page.tsx"
'use client'
import { useSession } from "next-auth/react"

export default function Home() {
  const { data: session } = useSession()
  console.log(session)

  return (
    <p>Home Page</p>
  )
}
```

Use [`useAuth()`](/docs/references/react/use-auth) if you need basic authentication information or [`useUser()`](/docs/references/react/use-user) if you need the full user object.

```tsx filename="app/page.tsx"
'use client'
import { useAuth, useUser } from "@clerk/nextjs";

export default function Home() {
  const { userId, sessionId } = useAuth();
  const { isSignedIn, user } = useUser();
  console.log(userId, sessionId, isSignedIn, user)

  return (
    <p>Home Page</p>
  )
}
```

### User IDs as Foreign Keys  

> When you migrate to Clerk, you will likely need to resolve the foreign key that you used in your database. If you used the userId from NextAuth.js, you could resolve this issue with one of the two following options.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you migrate to Clerk, you will likely need to resolve the foreign key that you used in your database. If you used the `userId` from NextAuth.js, you could resolve this issue with one of the two following options.
```

Reviewer 3: oops, I missed that too lol nice catch

```json
{
	"userId": "{{user.external_id || user.id}}"
}
``` 

In your application, you can access this 

```tsx
import { auth } from "@clerk/nextjs";
 
export default async function Page() {
 
  const { sessionClaims: { userId } } = auth()
  console.log(userId)

  return (
    <p>Home Page</p>
  )

}
```

<Callout type="info">
You can not access the above from the client side. If you are using one of Clerk's hooks then you will need to check if `externalID` exists and if not then read the `userId`. 
</Callout>

#### Update your database

Alternatively, after the data migration, you can update all the user IDs stored in your database as a foreign key to the new Clerk user IDs.

> You can read more about user IDs and user data migration in the migration script [README](https://github.com/clerk/migration-script?tab=readme-ov-file#handling-the-foreign-key-constraint).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can read more about user IDs and user data migration in the [migration script README](https://github.com/clerk/migration-script?tab=readme-ov-file#handling-the-foreign-key-constraint).
```

Reviewer 3: why?

Reviewer 2: @JacobMGEvans 

Imagine a screen reader reading out the link to their user. Or when the a screen reader user tabs through the interactive elements.

On this element it would only read out "README" otherwise. Including this gives context to the link, makes it clear what README it is.

3. Export all the user data from your database into a users.json file. The file should be in the following format.
```json filename="users.json"
[
  {
    "userId": "string",
    "email": "email",
    "firstName": "string (optional)",
    "lastName": "string (optional)",
    "password": "string (optional)",
    "passwordHasher": "argon2 | argon | bcrypt | md5 | pbkdf2_sha256 | pbkdf2_sha256_django | pbkdf2_sha1 | scrypt_firebase",
  }
]
```
4. If you already have an API endpoint in your NextAuth.js app that returns a list of users you could use that. Otherwise you will need to query your database to obtain the user information, or use an export function from a database management tool.
    
```sql
  SELECT id as userId, email, name FROM users
```
    
5. Edit the `.env.` file in the migration, and add your Clerk Secret Key using `CLERK_SECRET_KEY`
6. Run the script with `npm start`
7. Verify by signing in to your application secured by Clerk, and by checking the users listed in the [Users](https://dashboard.clerk.com/last-active?path=users) section of the Clerk Dashboard.

> 9. Check for an error log for any users that were not migreated successfully.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
9. Check for an error log for any users that were not migrated successfully.
```
